you know thinking about maybe not quite
the absurd but thinking about these
different ways of of producing and
expanding outwards
our next presentation comes from vernell
a a noel
vernell is uh is an architect design
scholar artist ted speaker and director
of the situated computation and design
lab at the georgia institute of
technology where she investigates
traditional and automated making human
computer interaction interdisciplinary
creativity and their intersections with
society her scholarship and expertise
include design in the trinidad carnival
craft practices architecture and art she
builds new expressions tools and
methodologies to explore social cultural
and political aspects of making
computational design and emerging
technology for new social and technical
reconfigurations of design practice
pedagogy and publics
her work is situated at the intersection
of computation ethnographic inquiry and
critical practice where she interrogates
socio-cultural and socio-technical
issues in computation and computational
technologies in design and making her
recent scholarship brings together
methods and concepts from craft human
computer interaction and media studies
as well as science and technology
studies
a scholar committed to fostering
inclusive and minority perspectives on
design making and technology noel
conducts workshops and gives talks on
design computation extensively across
the globe her work is thoroughly
interdisciplinary with training and
architecture design computation science
technology and sts studies media arts
and sciences as well as arts education
her research has been supported by the
graham foundation for advanced studies
in the fine arts the mozilla foundation
ideas to innovation and many more
dr noel is a recipient of the 2021
digital futures young award for
exceptional research and scholarship in
the field of critical computational
design
currently an assistant professor in the
school of architecture and the school of
interactive computing she teaches
courses in design computation and
architecture
and without further ado i will switch
over to vernell
hi everyone my name is vernell noel and
i'm a computational designer a maker a
scholar architect and artist
i'm also the director of the situated
computation and design lab at georgia
tech an interdisciplinary research lab
at the intersection of design technology
architecture art the sciences and
engineering
in my work i conduct research into for
through and with making
i examine traditional making practices
and cultures digital practices and
cultures and their intersections with
society
i was asked this question as a prompt
and i found it very provocative and i'll
answer it throughout my presentation
today what is most meaningful to my work
at this time
my current work examines cultural design
and making practices crafts and
technology
what's most meaningful at this time is
repairing
that being restoring remediating and
reconfiguring
design and art in cultural and craft
practices that are dying
dormant or risk
some of the problems i address in my
work
include the disappearance or eurasia of
craft and cultural knowledges practices
and communities two
the omission of craft cultural or the
exclusion of these knowledges and
communities from technological
discourses and three
understanding the effects of craft and
computation alongside human welfare
motivations for this work include the
creation of space for participation by
those missing
to the resisting of segregation and
privileging of certain types of
intelligences and skills and three to
amplify the stories of historically
excluded or marginalized groups
my focus over the past 14 years has been
the cultural practice of the trinidad
carnival
french planters introduced carnival to
trinidad in the 1780s
and although africans engaged in
carnival festivities during their
enslavement
after slavery was abolished in 1834 they
reinvented the carnival to express their
creativity their freedom their
aesthetic sensibilities and to reclaim
their humanity in the face of a system
that considered them less than human
while europeans participated in carnival
were fun and thrilling for those of
african descent carnival was a religion
and a psychological release of tensions
from domination segregation and the
violent inhumane systems of control
this is an engraving from 1888 of
carnival celebrations in the capital
city of portersville
now the term trinidad carnival or
carnival trinidad and tobago carnival
does not define the carnival's
geographic location but instead it's
origin and the main elements that define
the candidate
the three mean and events that define
the trinidad carnival are mass or
masquerade
calypso and soccer music which is the
music and rhythm native patronage
and the steel pan or steel drum which is
a musical instrument invented
in the 1930s in trinidad and tobago by
the african wooden class from old
discarded oil drugs
there are more than 70 there are spur
cannibals around the globe in the u.s
the uk several parts of the caribbean
and
these are images of juve one aspect of
the carnival which originates from the
celebration of resistance and
emancipation from enslavement from the
dangerous cruel forced labor of
enslavement
in addition to carnival being about
celebrating resistance and emancipation
carnival is also a space of joy
creativity and innovation
it's a space where people socially
interact and there are feelings of
togetherness during these making and
designing activities in carnival
there's mentoring and cooperation with
people learning how to socialize respect
each other respect the arts and artists
and there's community engagement with
practitioners doing activities that keep
their community and keep different
communities
together
there's also costuming with people
creating and performing
histories imagination social and
political topics for competitions and
masquerades on the left is costuming
from the 1950s when they write from
2016.
and in addition to costuming we also
have these large spot deals design
structures that are decorated and
performed in the carnival we call them
kings and queens of carnival i define
them as dancing sculptures and within
the carnival one of the craft practices
integral to the designer fabrication of
costumes and dancing sculptures like
these is a craft of wire bending
fire bending is a craft that combines
elements of engineering architecture and
sculpture to create structures like
these it began in the 1950s in carnival
and then it weightable fiberglass broad
skin and other linear materials are bent
and shaped to create these structures
for performance these large artefacts so
these architectures are expressions of
creativity innovation and technical
skill
this these are photos of explode wire
vendor steven derek performing wire
bending
he has unfortunately since passed away
but this craft is at risk and is dying
due to dying and retiring practitioners
technocentric developments changing
practices and because there's little to
no documentation of knowledge in this
craft forest transmission
my work involves restoring mediating and
reconfiguring this craft practice and
its knowledges
in carnival arts by continuing to focus
on the sense of community
that the carnival affiliates
this is albert bailey and again stephen
derek two expert wire vendors i studied
and i studied them and their work to
create a language a language that
describes a craft of wire bending
they called it the daily direct grammar
and this language just two
computationally describes technical
knowledge in wire bending it's a series
of drawings that describe the steps the
materials and techniques in wire bending
allowing analysis
of wire bending artifacts transmission
of this knowledge and expertise
for education and for practice
and this um what has been meaningful
here is also the ability to teach and
pass this knowledge on to others
so i conduct workshops you know
to
about this craft this particular art
and this included art students and
teachers in trinidad and tobago and
architecture students i teach them the
daily direct grammar that is technical
knowledge
in wire bending how to use the grammar
not only to design and build artifacts
but how to use it to ask questions to
speculate
to explore to experiment
i then demonstrate the practical part of
the craft that is how to make pens how
to rotate one's wrist etc
and what has been meaningful about this
has been the creation of a new
collaborative approach to the craft that
did not exist before
currently wire binding is a singular
practice with one person to one artifact
the grammar opens it up with many people
to one artifact the fourth a
collaborative approach which does not
exist currently and appealed to
participants
further reinforcing the mentoring
cooperation and social interactions
that's embedded in making and the
incarnate world
drawing on this tradition that is part
of my culture i make artifacts and
architecture using techniques in wire
binding
these are photos of some of my
sculptures
i love lines in this case i love
tangible lines and intangible lines i
love the tectonics of materials as they
come together the interactions with
light shadow and surfaces
the artifact is really not the thing
it's not the final thing it's hold the
artifact and what the artifact reveals
in its interactions with light
shadow and surfaces
aligns interactions with shadows
light
surfaces and even itself so that
intrigues me
this is one of my pieces symphosis
currently on exhibit
at the uqem design center in montreal
canada
what's most meaningful about this is
that i'm able to share these histories
and cultures of design and making and
carnival
while making these artifacts as i think
about them as i share them with others
in addition to sculptures i also
experiment with the scrap at the
architectural scale by designing and
building pavilions
this is a pavilion my students and i
build using techniques and wire bending
that same craft that's dying is hair
being used to create architecture to
create new poet except construction
highlighting a local material
a local material practice a place and
people
what's meaningful here is that this
builds on this craft with traditional
and technical technological knowledge to
revive craft
revive collaboration communal ways of
making mentoring and cooperating using
the sculptural graph
for this second pavilion project we
again use techniques and ways of making
wire bending and carnival to design and
build a structure that celebrates
cultures of making with accessible
materials and technologies that have
hair this will be made using fiberglass
rods and we call this
an active venting structure
[Music]
my last project i'll share with you is a
recent one launched just four weeks ago
it brings together machine learning
heritage art architecture and culture
funded by the mozilla foundation
their call was for
projects examining the effects of
artificial intelligence or racial
justice
our position was that we wanted to use
ai and machine learning to generate and
circulate black cultural heritage and
value we wanted to showcase how our
creativity is tied to our history our
liberation and our innovations
how our expressions in art design and
dance are vehicles through which we have
photo oppression shared knowledge and
shared absolute joy
my collaborators were valencia james a
dancer performer practitioner at the
intersection of technology and dance and
dr natris gaskins an artist
author and academic
our vision was an empowered creative
black and caribbean community
that engaged with learn about and
interrogate ei to benefit ourselves and
to contribute to global discourses on ei
through culture cultural practices of
and in carnival because we are already
implicated in decisions around big data
so remember i showed you all these
dancing sculptures earlier
for our project we
our project involved creating a data set
of hundreds of images of dancing
sculptures and using style gang to
generate new imaginations new design
possibilities for
future
other dancing sculptures what might
other dancing sculptures look like when
their data set
is uh hundreds of images of other dance
sculptings
these are some of the designs generated
from the network from that data set of
dancing skeletons
these
imaginations these imaginary
dancing sculptures
are
make us think about the possibilities
for not just design but construction
think about what stories they might tell
what histories they might tell
and
there are possibilities that reconnect
people to their history and connect them
to possible futures
now this project is more than the
generation of design possibilities but
it includes how we showcase celebrate
and extend carnival and aspects of
carnival using digital foods and
technologies how do we reach our publix
touch the ground there are several
aspects of this product so i encourage
you to check it out but i'll share just
three parts of it uh the virtual gallery
the virtual juve and the virtual max
so i uh designed and uh modeled the
architecture for this gallery built it
in most of the hubs
and the gallery showcases ai generated
dancing sculptures with audio describing
the word and carnival it also encourages
participation by those who visit the
gallery to encourage you to check it out
and
this part of the exhibition revolution
this showcases ai generated jab jabs and
blue devils and japanese in the carnival
again there's audio describing the
history of juve carnival describing the
exhibit with video and music curating
the feel of julie with its scary
beautiful hearts
these are some of the e.i generated blue
devils and jab jabs and jewelry
and in this virtual mask persons can get
a taste of what being in carnival is
like with stages to listen to super
music watch videos and images on
carnival
so i encourage you to check them all out
and what's meaningful about this project
is that persons outside the bubble of
academia
artists and just people all over the
world anyone can get a taste of what the
carnival is about learn about ai it can
be used to teach persons about chronicle
and so much more
the case at which this project touches
the ground is also quick and accessible
uh persons can experience it on their
phones share it with others um join or
get in these virtual spaces and meet
others and again affirm the sense of
community that's foundational to the
trinidad carnival i encourage you to
check it out and um take some time i
think we'll be taking some time during
the festival to explore these spaces
together
sign our guest book and tell us what you
think
so
these works i've shared with you are
meaningful because they create spaces
for participation by those who are
missing in fields of art architecture
technology-based work
and more
they resist the segregation and
privileging of certain types of
intelligences
that being not just technological
intelligences but craft culture using
the body
uh and they amplify the stories of
historically excluded and marginalized
groups and their knowledges
and
i thank you very much
thank you very much greetings festival
hi doreen
hi there
hi everybody we're back uh with doreen
rios and vernell a noel who you just
heard from
um renault when we met prior to the
festival you sent me the link to this
show and you asked me to write back to
you and tell you how it made me feel um
and i never wrote back to you but i've
been dying to tell you how it made me
feel um and
the the the word that i could the best
way i could describe was like welcomed
and included um i think because when you
walk in the space you have this
wonderful audio that kind of walks you
through explains what's going on um it's
so vibrant it's so it's such a joyful
presentation um
and yeah i think that it was just so
fabulous to get to see that kind of you
know to see the machine's vision of what
of what carnival might might look like
i'd love to hear a little bit more about
this particular project and how you got
started working on it um
what um you know i mean prior to you
know started working with the mozilla
foundation um you know what made you
want to work combine uh artificial
intelligence with with carnival
um so
um so carnival continues to fascinate me
right i find it so rich of everything
from art to design social issues
environmental political you name it so i
find it to be
the seed of everything good
um and everything
to ask questions with um and
really it was about nicole um the trees
sent
us this link of this call from mozilla
um where they wanted to look at where
they were
the quotes around artificial
intelligence and racial justice
and of course you always find some way
to but
what you do with what you want to do
um and that was it really i i
i knew i
um
the generation of designs for dancing
sculptures for future
types of making and testing of making is
something that i you know i it's my work
and so
ai was the topic and the methodology and
so
i wanted to test that and what and what
the process was like what the results
might be what they might tell us
so it was just a matter of
i think combining a call and how we
frame
um
or frame around racial justice is one of
celebrating
those who are excluded or creativity and
how we use
our culture our practices as a vehicle
to teach us
about these tools that we are already
implicated in but that we are left out
of when it comes to developing them
i mean what's that i think that's
something that i wanted to ask you about
because
you know oftentimes you know we've heard
we've heard talks you know for instance
from am dark yesterday and she was
talking about how racist algorithmic
search results once you see them and
they become materialized on your on your
screen it becomes somehow more real and
more impactful and more damaging um and
you know it's it's really amazing to see
this technology which has been used to
exclude used to extract um and used to
otherwise obviate black stories black
voices um
you know you use it in a way that uh the
counter acts that in a lot of ways to me
and uh pushes back against
um that
that erasure um and instead you know
uses it to expand the story um and uh
you know provide different access points
in
um i'm wondering how you know through
this practice
um and through this project
you were able to kind of uh turn those
narratives over about how the algorithm
was working either against her for you
around um and what it was like to
wrestle with some of those things
um
i i wouldn't say i've
as yet
um
wrestled with what the algorithm has
given given me given us
um i haven't
asked that question i haven't reflected
on the project in that way just yet
um
because it's more than the than what the
thing gives us but creating these
digital experiences and especially where
over the past two years many um
communities countries we weren't able to
engage in carnival because of the
pandemic
the carnival is a real thing people feel
it in their bones when february is
coming close right and so that space for
music for dance
that hasn't been there for two years
and so how do
we and we as a diaspora globally right
black white brown you name it how
might
this platform with these digital
experiences via space where we all could
meet come together experience this thing
that might be new or not to us
um
to see their body sharing through this
exploration but
trying to not necessarily simulate or
replicate carnival but
um
help us as we get through the next
uh the past two years without the space
for expression it is an expression it's
something that physically comes forward
from us how do we create a space for
that enjoyment
oh sorry
i was just thinking on how
also it feels like
you know when we when we talk about this
kind of
processes that embed a i into creating a
series of so-called new representations
but actually he's just you know
reconfiguration of the representations
that we already have and we have these
and we create these data sets that
really represent in order to rethink
um
let's say objects or events or people or
circumstances that are around us and i i
kept on thinking how these connects very
well with uh with a concert with a
question that i've had probably for the
past five years which is like it is not
only about talking or pointing at the
the problems that we have when
developing or creating ai
systems right it's also how do we
make ourselves visible there how do we
represent ourselves how do we share what
surrounds us our stories and our
traditions from there and
at least for me for instance it was like
well i know a couple of mexican artists
that are working with these processes
but that are not necessarily um
in a way connecting with the local
stories as such just with certain
representations of what it means
apparently to be mexican right
which is something that is well i don't
know crazy to
create just like a super abstraction of
it but um what i really really enjoyed
what i really enjoyed about your artwork
is that
it is not intended to reduce something
or to make it uh let's say super legible
uh unlike these projects right i think
that what he's doing is expanding those
stories and bringing that to the present
but also to the future how are we gonna
be
uh taking this into the future right and
what can we keep or what should be
um you know like placed within the
conversation that is actually important
and which things need to change as well
and um i don't know i think a lot about
you know science fiction um
writers or such as like uh octavia
butler for instance uh who was very
strong about like well you know if we do
not write the stories where we put
ourselves there and we do not represent
ourselves there no one is gonna do that
for us as
tough as that sounds and uh and i think
that is something that is very strong in
your work and um and i just wanted to
hear a little bit more about that
expansion into the present but also into
the future or how you envision these um
with you within your practice let's say
generally speaking as well
sure um i mean while doreen i i think i
i wanted to describe my project from now
on um
so i so
in terms of the sort of future thinking
of it i think of it through
um or making practices
um or education
and
our
celebration of
how our expressions of creativity
continue to
be a free will for us a feeling for
change
um
how
especially as as an educator these
very abstract
dematerialized ways of engaging in it
could be architecture it could be
computation programming these very
abstract ways of thinking
that uh separate us from our emotions
that's not the culture that i come from
right and and
making spaces where
people who understand the world
through
dancing through
music through all of these voices of art
that that too is valid and this
sterilization of knowledge and
sterilization of what
is digital knowledge or what's a data
set
is not the only way and it should not
this kind this erasure
of people's histories i think is is what
i'm trying to
push back against in in my work um
that is unkind to erase people's
histories
um it's violence so erase people's
histories and stories new stories get
told
without that context and the very people
who created these practices are they're
no longer there in those stories and and
that there are underground repercussions
to these things right
um
and so it's about
you know highlighting how wonderful that
i need to okay you all know it's
wonderful but i think
showing other possibilities for how we
might think through and ask questions
about technology ask questions about
ourselves ask questions about society uh
get into the nitty gritties of
the material
materialities of not just crowd
practices but technologies um through
these practices and continue
the processes of making these costumes
dancing sculptures technological
artifacts that we can tell our stories
to others and
question those histories and question
voices just
creating space for conversation and
debate
um
i i wanted to dig in a little bit more
into this um and because i think you
know this festival is welding protocol
and we're really trying to rethink ways
that the world around us is constructed
and ways that we might be able to
repurpose things that are harmful or
um you know write new ones and i'm
wondering you know um you know in
thinking about this expansion into the
future
um that you were just describing
um you know what other ways can you know
we as users of technology of people who
are as people who are subjected to the
layers of software that permeate our
society you know what can we do you know
within that context to
to to push back or to repurpose these
these harmful uh techniques tools
technologies and methodologies
when we uh um i one way i've been
thinking through
our tools so this semester
yeah this semester i did a quick
workshop with some students around ai
and design
and an important part of it was for
students to
because as architects right i'm teaching
architecture students
we just use tools that we get
right any company drops a tool we use it
without questioning the two without
understanding the infrastructure the
power behind those tools um and i i want
wanted students to be aware of that like
who are these people making these two
what is the history of these two
like
when you
visualize the landscape of who's making
these tools and understanding the
histories of these technologies
it's a way for us to frame and ask
ourselves
how we use these tools
why we use these tools what it says that
these tools have been developed and we
continue to use them without questioning
them and questioning or like through her
benjamin would say always reimagining
other possibilities right um
shedding light on the faces
and the money behind
these infrastructures i think is
important for us to do for all tools
that we use
so that we understand
that that person it's not just a tool
like a a tool is a is a it's a a value
it's a theory it's a way of seeing the
world where you make something is the
way you see the world and if you're
making tools that are exclusive and
exclude people it's a way that you see
and so my
take on it would really be to dig into
the histories of these tools develop
your own
um
because there are no huge behemoths that
that take from us they continue to be
extracted right
um
just just
do the work
nowadays unfortunately
we have to do the work it's not we can't
not do the work our the work of
generations after me unfortunately is
the amount of work that people have to
do frankly um but we have to really work
we have to
all interfaces are political and
cultural interfaces simultaneously
you see i i need during during i need
you in my life
i need you in my life
[Laughter]
you know what bernal
like almost every day
but um
you know in in
interesting so earlier today we were
talking to jeremy cuiard who's a game
designer um and a visual artist um among
other things and he was talking about
working in game spaces kind of like a
collaboration with the software and in
so many ways i think that the kind of
generative artificial intelligence work
like these images in in the in the
project um you know really represent a
kind of a kind of collaboration in a way
and i was wondering if that's something
that resonates with you um and if so
what was that experience like of
collaborating with with the algorithm to
produce to produce these images
yeah so i would agree on valencia james
who i know is in gray area and who was
on the project too she always says you
know ai as a creative partner right
um
and so i i do
you know it's a creative partner but my
for example those images that are
generated my work goes beyond that
meaning i want to attempt to make these
things to ask through the questions
about materials techniques etc so it's
more likely visual but you know in my
mind i have to make this for the
question to be complete right um
but
the
first set of results from it was like
wow like
i didn't you know my student was working
with me on it and we we had no idea what
it would be
and it blew us away right so it was
almost dream like
exciting
it was just way cool
um
and beautiful you know um
it was recognizable some things looked
real some things the sort of ghostly
images of some of them really you're
asking what is this what might it be
what can it be
um so it's exciting it definitely was
exciting yeah for sure
that's so that's so it's so much fun
especially you know i like working with
you know with code based uh and you know
work because you know it's always a
little bit of a surprise every time and
there's a little bit of there's some
there's some kind of wonder that's
embedded in that that i think you know
makes it a really enjoyable process
um
i wanted to you know we don't have a ton
of time left but i just wanted to ask
you a little bit you know i know that
you you know work um you know you work
with the uh the situation the situated
computation design lab um at georgia
tech and i was wondering if you could
tell us a little bit about kind of what
does that term situated computation mean
um and what's what uh what kind of work
are you are you doing there
sure so um currently i'm in stuttgart
i'm in germany until december but when i
get back to
georgia tech um
ideally the lab which i still will be
setting up when i get that um we work
around so situated competitions is about
the questions the tools and technologies
like i just mentioned or field
uh in which all technologies involved
that it asks that we not remain ignorant
of social and political structures that
shape the tools and methods that we use
in art using design etc right so no
pretending that oh it's just a tool to
draw with no these things are as doreen
just beautifully said social and
political tools in the world right
theories ideas values
um
and so in in my research lab the goal is
to of course think through these things
by making whether it be making
technologies making artifacts making
processes
uh questioning education and design
education how we educate when it comes
to these technologies uh how we educate
our publics that being those outside the
academic bubble um and how we
think through societies and how we are
implicated in these technologies again
being critical of our field our work and
not just the passive uses of things that
are made for us um without um
really engaging it's
like way every in 2021 and it's it's
hard to not and
not engage and grab these real things of
social absolution of issues um
so yeah we're doing everything we're
having fun we're doing carnival we're
doing architecture we're doing learning
all the way and asking i think was some
questions
absolutely and i don't know i just love
that i love that term situated
computation and i you know
um
i just think that you know thinking
about how we are as situated within a
system feels like such a productive way
of
you know thinking about the world around
us um and it feels so much more
connected to all you know we're really
you know and thinking about
interconnectedness and interdependence
because we're all interdependent in one
way or another um and it you know this
feels like a tool kit that can
allow for again yeah more productive uh
thinking through the complexity of of
our situations
um
and ourselves like we're we're
individuals we're communities we aren't
we aren't there is no universal
description for us all
um and we have to do the work of getting
to know
deeply things so that we could make
you know
wise decisions and have good
conversations rather than making things
that
are you know abandoned
to solve many problems would cause more
problems right
wow
vernell it was been so amazing to have
you it's been so much fun to explore the
rooms of missile hubs the audience you
can go to
carnival-ai.com to learn more and
experience this uh take some screenshots
to let them know how it makes you feel
there's some cool ways that you can
participate and join the conversation um
and um
yeah let us know what you think let us
know how it makes you feel um
thank you so much thank you so much for
having me great area i appreciate this
so much thank you
and thank you for calling in from
germany i thought i didn't realize that
you were in europe i realized it's super
late
i'm so so now
okay so thank you for calling in so late
at night we really appreciate it
thank you so much